Tetanus is a serious but rare condition caused by bacteria getting into a wound.
In 2013, there were seven cases of tetanus in England and Wales. The number is low because an effective tetanus vaccine is given as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.
Most people who get tetanus weren't vaccinated against it or didn't complete the entire vaccination schedule.
This page covers:
How you get tetanus 
Symptoms 
When to get medical advice 
How tetanus is treated 
Vaccination 
Travel jab 
Tetanus bacteria can survive for a long time outside the body, and are commonly found in soil and the manure of animals such as horses and cows.
If the bacteria enter the body through a wound, they can quickly multiply and release a toxin that affects the nerves, causing symptoms such as muscle stiffness and spasms.
The bacteria can get into your body through:
Tetanus can't be spread from person to person.
The symptoms of tetanus usually develop 4 to 21 days after infection. On average, they start after around 10 days.
The main symptoms include:
Left untreated, the symptoms can get worse over the following hours and days.
Contact your GP or visit your nearest minor injuries unit if you're concerned about a wound, particularly if:
Your GP will assess the wound and decide whether you need treatment and whether you need to go to hospital.
Go immediately to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department or call 999 for an ambulance if you develop severe muscle stiffness or spasms.
If your doctor thinks you could develop tetanus but you haven't had any symptoms yet, they'll clean your wounds and give you an injection of tetanus immunoglobulin. They may also give you a dose of the tetanus vaccine if you haven't been fully vaccinated in the past.
Tetanus immunoglobulin is a medication that contains antibodies that kill the tetanus bacteria. It provides immediate but short-term protection from tetanus.
If you develop symptoms of tetanus, you'll usually need to be admitted to a hospital intensive care unit (ICU), where you may be given a number of different treatments. These could include tetanus immunoglobulin, antibiotics, and medication to relieve muscle stiffness and spasms.
Most people who develop symptoms of tetanus eventually recover, although it can take several weeks or months.
A tetanus vaccination is given as part of the NHS childhood vaccination programme.
The full course of the vaccination requires five injections, usually given on the following schedule:
This course of five injections should provide long-lasting protection against tetanus. However, if you or your child has a deep or dirty wound, it's best to get medical advice.
If you're not sure whether you've had the full vaccination course, contact your GP surgery for advice. It's possible to fully vaccinate older children and adults who weren't vaccinated when they were younger.
Tetanus is found throughout the world, so you should ideally make sure you're fully vaccinated before travelling abroad.
Contact your GP surgery for advice if you're planning on travelling abroad and haven't been fully vaccinated against tetanus, or you're going to an area with limited medical facilities and your last vaccine dose was more than 10 years ago.
If you've never had a tetanus vaccination before, you may be advised to have as many of the three initial doses of the vaccine as possible before you leave (there should be one-month gaps between each dose) and complete the full course when you return.
If you've been partly or fully vaccinated, a tetanus shot is usually still recommended as a precaution if you're travelling to an area with limited medical facilities and your last dose of the vaccine was more than 10 years ago.
You'll be offered another 3-in-1 teenage booster. This additional booster shot, which also protects against diphtheria and polio, is usually free on the NHS.
Read more about travel vaccinations.
With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in.
