Here's a checklist of the vaccines that are routinely offered to everyone in the UK for free on the NHS, and the ages at which they should ideally be given. 
If you're not sure whether you or your child have had all your routine vaccinations, ask your GP or practice nurse to find out for you. It may be possible to catch up later in life.
Try to have your vaccinations delivered on time to ensure protection. If you're going to be away from the GP surgery when a vaccination is due, talk to your doctor. It may be possible to arrange to have the vaccination at a different location.
5-in-1 vaccine – this single jab contains vaccines to protect against five separate diseases: diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis), polio and Haemophilus influenzae type b (known as Hib – a bacterial infection that can cause severe pneumonia or meningitis in young children)  
5-in-1 vaccine, second dose
Rotavirus vaccine, second dose
5-in-1 vaccine, third dose
Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, second dose
Men B vaccine second dose 
Hib/Men C vaccine, given as a single jab containing vaccines against meningitis C (first dose) and Hib (fourth dose) 
Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, given as a single jab 
Pneumococcal (PCV) vaccine, third dose
Men B vaccine, third dose 
Children's flu vaccine (annual)
Measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) vaccine, second dose
4-in-1 pre-school booster, given as a single jab containing vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus, whooping cough (pertussis) and polio 
HPV vaccine, which protects against cervical cancer – two injections given 6-12 months apart
3-in-1 teenage booster, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against diphtheria, tetanus and polio 
Men ACWY vaccine, given as a single jab and contains vaccines against meningitis A, C, W and Y
Flu vaccine (every year)
There are some vaccines that aren't routinely available to everyone on the NHS, but that are available for people who fall into certain risk groups, such as vaccines for pregnant women, people with long-term health conditions, and healthcare workers.
Additional vaccines for special groups include:
There are some travel vaccines that you should be able to have free on the NHS from your local surgery. These include:
Other travel vaccines, such as yellow fever vaccination, are only available privately. 
Find out more from our section on travel vaccines.
Download this personalised vaccination calendar, which highlights the dates your child needs to have their vaccinations by
Learn about the vaccinations available for travellers, and the diseases they protect against
A new Men B vaccine called Bexsero is available on the NHS for babies aged 8 weeks, 16 weeks and one year old
With an account you can keep track of pages on the site and save them to this tab, which you can access on every page when you are logged in.
